So let's talk about
the running time of this one,
cuz it is actually
exceptionally complicated.
The first time I walked through
the running time of this one,
I was just like got it, went looked up on
the internet I was like, don't got it.
And I had to undo it a couple times and
really kind of critically think
about what happened there.
So let's walk through the pseudocode
right now and kinda discuss what happens.
So the first thing is we have to do
these operations right here, right?
We have to create our seen array,
our previous array and our dist array,
correct?
Awesome, this obviously means
we have to do O(V), right?
We have to create these
arrays that are V long, okay?
Pretty straightforward here.
Now, this is something
that's kind of interesting.
In our case, we're gonna go through
worst case every single node,
but what is the running
time of this function?
Right, so this while loop is O(V), right?
When we go through every single node once,
but
what is the running time of this
function cuz we call it O(V) times.
Well, we go through our entire distance
array, or we go through our entire
seen array, which means that this
function is running time is O(V),
which means this while loop checking
is gonna be O(V) squared, right?
We've now just done something where
we're every single time we go to node,
we check all other nodes once.
That makes sense.
The same thing with this one.
This is also O(V) squared because
we're gonna do this get lowest
unvisited check V amount of times and
its running time is v amount of checks,
cuz it has to go through our entire
seen array or entire distance array.
Now you know how I initially told
you in the beginning yesterday,
that the easiest way to look at
runtime is just count loops,
this is where that is just a complete lie,
okay?
This is where I miscalculated distedge is
the first time cuz you'd probably go O.
This is O(E), right?
Well, look at that what happened?
Right, you'd probably say this is O(E),
correct?
Because it's going through every edge,
right?
Then you say well if the while
loop is gonna execute O(V)
times that means this should be
O(V) multiplied by E, correct?
Incorrect, my goodness.
Okay, so are you ready for
the most mind blowing as part
about distedge shortest path?
Yes, Yes, I'm so excited.
Perfect, all right, let's just pretend
we have this very simple graph.
They are gonna be undirected nodes.
So in reality, they are the maximum
worst case for dicer, right?
Cuz that means every single node
has a connection both ways.
So if we start here and
we visit this node,
we are gonna visit each one
of the edges once, correct?
Then we go to another node we're gonna
visit each one of these edges once.
Yes, then we're gonna go to the next node,
we'll visit each one of these edges once.
Then we'll go to the lastly to this node,
which will visit each edge once.
How many times did we check the edges?
We checked it 2E, right,
we only went over 2E.
We checked each edge twice.
So it's actually 2E for the entire thing.
So this four loop the reason why
it is that way is this four loop
is not exhaustive.
It doesn't go over every
edge in the graph.
It goes over every edge that is connected.
But if we use an adjacency matrix, and
we had the check every single node we
would get that terrible running time.
But since we have an adjacency list
we only check the nodes that were
connected to 2, so
this becomes o(E) in total, right?
That is what we're walking over, so
that means our running time would look
something like O(V) squared + E, right?
We're gonna do that.
Lastly, this thing right
here is actually just O(1).
So it's really fast,
we don't even have to think about it.
Super duper fast, awesome, right?
So that is our running time,
in the way we've made it.
So now here kind of comes a big
culmination of the class.
How can we improve the running
time of this to be better?
Let me say that differently,
we need the lowest distance
that has not been seen
But again Maria, why don't I know?
The answer is a minimum heap, right?
If we had a minheap,
we would literally remove the node,
which means we have seen it and
it can't be back inside of it.
Therefore we don't need to see an array
because by the very state of the heap, it
has been seen cuz we remove it and B it's
always the smallest node at that point.
[SOUND] Right, that is awesome,
which means that we do
need to do something here.
And if you remember from earlier update,
was that function we didn't write,
we'd actually have to call heap update,
which needs the use of map to O log or
O(1), get the node.
Then from there,
update it either heap are fining it up or
heap are fining it down depending
on how the distance was changed.
Yeah, yeah, which means that this
becomes a log V operation right here.
This becomes a log V operation right
here and this becomes a log V operation
right here which means that we're
going to do an E amount of log V.
He's so our running time becomes log V
multiplied by V plus E which is much
better than V squared so there we go we've
just done it we've just made something
better by simply changing the data
structure that we were using Yeah?
Everyone's excited?
Okay, why do I feel like I'm
the only one excited about this?
This blew my mind, right,
this is fantastic.
All right,
I thought this was incredible, so
this was one of my favorite kind of
understandings of data structures is that,
A, we broke down a really
intense running time.
This is a running time that's
non-trivial to understand.
By simply just drawing
out what's happening,
we see right away that it's not V times E,
it's actually V plus E.
It becomes more obvious because
we only check the edges once.
All right, fantastic, I'm excited,
or is everyone else excited?
Okay, there's some excitement.
We got some excitement going, Kareem,
we're gonna need to see
some excitement levels.
I need to see it go north by at least two.
All right, two units of excitement.
All right, let's see.
It's probably, this dextrose is usually
the first algorithm you usually learn
after breadth first search and
depth of first Search.
Apparently, I got so excited I'm going
out of order of my notes and there we go.
We are now kind of done with the graph
section I kept the graph section low cuz
as you can see it gets
complicated super duper quick.
And we did probably the easiest
algorithm on graphs as this.
We did not do min or max flows ,we
didn't do strongly connected components
topological sort any of the fun stuff
that can exist within the graph realm but
it was still pretty radical,
I really liked it.
I'm super pumped,
I'm pumped out of my mind.
All right, let's see if there is a part
two we will cover some more significantly
more complicated fun graphs,
any questions here?
Do we have any questions here?
>> Are there a lot of graph questions and
interviews?
>> Often they're gonna
break down like here.
Here's a good graph question
that I've seen before.
And this is one that I have
received in an interview.
All right,
let's pretend that we have a 2D array
in which is filled with 1s and 0s, right?
0, 1, 0, 0, 1, 1, 1 1, 0, and
what I want you to tell me in here,
is I want you to tell me
how many islands there are.
Island is anything in which has a 1
that's connected in any of the four o
cordinal direction to another one.
So, any contiguous set of 1s.
So, that'll be one island,
there'd be two islands,
the secret here is you use a breadth
first or really a depth first search.
You can kind of choose
which way you want to go.
You just simply start right there, mark
this thing as seen, increment how many
island you've seen add all of these in
here and say, hey, are any of you guys 0s?
None of you're zeros, I'm done looking.
Keep scanning till you hit the next one,
we have another island we found,
mark this a 0 scan, right,
you scan in all four directions.
Off the map, off the map, here's another
1,0, going for directions, right?
This is a 0 market this as 0 going
four directions, blah, blah, blah,
going four directions, and there you go.
Then you eventually make
it to the end of the math.
And boom, we just got ourselves done
counting the amount of islands we have
seen in a graph of 0s and 1s.
See graphs, graphs are great.
It's just a depth first search.
That's all it is.
It's just applying a small technique to
a depth first search when I heard this
question though,
even though I knew all these things,
my very first thing I thought was,
no, I can't do this.
And then it turns out
it was really simple.
I just had to talk myself through it,
went through all the data structures I
understood and realized that a simple
depth for search will get me to all of it
or breath for search,
whichever one you wanted to do.
And I could kind of walk through, cool?